data_3101_syllabus.md, before:

---
editor_options: 
  markdown: 
    wrap: 72
---

# Data 3101 Syllabus

Elizabeth_Stregger 2024-08-16

# Data Acquisition and Organization (Fall 2024)

## Contact information:

Elizabeth Stregger\
Email: [estregger\@mta.ca](mailto:estregger@mta.ca){.email}\
Office: Library M13\
Office hours / help: by appointment\
Request an appointment:
[https://outlook.office365.com/owa/calendar/LibraryAppointments\@mta.ca/bookings/s/Lm8pmHeFAkCS_M_0xKAYEQ2](https://outlook.office365.com/owa/calendar/LibraryAppointments@mta.ca/bookings/s/Lm8pmHeFAkCS_M_0xKAYEQ2){.uri}

TA: Sabrina Sandy

## Course description:

This course will build on MATH 1311 to cover high throughput acquisition
and management of data. The course will use diverse data types and
formats to illustrate conceptual challenges across disciplines.
Technical aspects will include evolving approaches to script-based web
scraping, file formats and conversions, data mergers and tidying,
metadata organization and capture. In parallel, the course will cover
theoretical and ethical aspects of data curation and access policies,
development of best practices for research data management and case
studies in secure management of sensitive or private data.

## Key resources (Open Access):

Bryan, J. (n.d.) Happy Git and GitHub for the useR.
<https://happygitwithr.com/index.html>
<https://rfortherestofus.com/2021/02/how-to-use-git-github-with-r/>

Thompson, E. by K., Hill, E., Carlisle-Johnston, E., Dennie, D., &
Fortin, É. (2023). *Research Data Management in the Canadian Context*.
Western University, Western Libraries.
<https://doi.org/10.5206/ZRUV7849>

Wickham, H., Çetinkaya-Rundel, M., & Grolemund, G. (2023). R for data
science: Import, tidy, transform, visualize, and model data (2nd
edition). O’Reilly Media, Inc. <https://r4ds.hadley.nz/>

## Learning objectives

At the end of the course, students are expected to be able to:

-   Demonstrate in depth understanding of the principles, motivations
    and goals for reproducible, ethical, and open data

-   Use Git for communication and reproducible version control

-   Import and tidy diverse data sources across platforms

-   Explore data to identify potential research questions or problems in
    the dataset\

-   Identify best practices for research data management, including data
    organization, storage, security, sharing, and ethical re-use

-   Demonstrate what they have learned about data acquisition, data
    organization, and data tools through self-reflection

# Course schedule (subject to change)

## Week 1 (Sep. 3 & 5)

#### Topics:

-   Course Introduction

-   Install-a-thon: R & Git Repository setup

#### Reading:

Bryan, J. (2018). Excuse Me, Do You Have a Moment to Talk About Version
Control? *The American Statistician*, *72*(1), 20–27.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/00031305.2017.1399928>

## Week 2 (Sep. 10 & 12)

#### Topics:

-   Introduction to R & RStudio

-   Research Data Management Overview

#### **Readings:**

Thompson, K. (2023). The Basics: An Introduction to Research Data
Management. In K. Thompson, E. Hill, E. Carlisle-Johnston, D. Dennie, &
É. Fortin (Eds.), *Research Data Management in the Canadian Context: A
Guide for Practitioners and Learners* (English). Western University,
Western Libraries. <https://doi.org/10.5206/OWNV1575>

Wickham, H., Çetinkaya-Rundel, M., & Grolemund, G. (2023). Workflow:
Basics. In *R for Data Science* (2nd ed.).
<https://r4ds.hadley.nz/workflow-basics>

#### **Assignment 1:**

-   First push to GitHub (due Sep. 12)

## Week 3 (Sep. 17 & 19)

#### Topics:

-   Data Transformation with DPLYR Part 1

-   Data problems: Retraction Watch

#### Reading:

-   Wickham, H., Çetinkaya-Rundel, M., & Grolemund, G. (2023). Data
    transformation. In *R for Data Science* (2nd ed.).
    <https://r4ds.hadley.nz/data-transform>

#### Assignment 2:

-   Deposit code from DPLYR live-coding (due Sep. 19)

## Week 4 (Sep. 24 & 26)

#### Topics:

-   Data Transformation with DPLYR Part 2

-   Code Style

-   GitHub & R Follow-up

#### Readings:

-   Wickham, H., Çetinkaya-Rundel, M., & Grolemund, G. (2023c).
    Workflow: Code style. In *R for Data Science* (2nd ed.).
    <https://r4ds.hadley.nz/workflow-style>

-   Wickham, H., Çetinkaya-Rundel, M., & Grolemund, G. (2023). Joins. In
    *R for Data Science* (2nd ed.). <https://r4ds.hadley.nz/joins>

#### Assignment 3:

-   Retraction Watch assignment (due Sep. 26)

#### Assignment 4:

-   Update code from DPLYR live-coding, using styler (due Sep. 26)

## Week 5 (Oct. 1 & 3)

#### Topics:

-   Data Tidying in R Part 1

-   Data Tidying in R Part 2

#### Readings:

-   Constanzo, L. (2023). Data cleaning during the research data
    management process. In K. Thompson, E. Hill, E.
    Carlisle-Johnston, D. Dennie, & É. Fortin (Eds.), *Research Data
    Management in the Canadian Context: A Guide for Practitioners and
    Learners* (English). Western University, Western Libraries.
    <https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/canadardm/chapter/data-cleaning-during-the-research-data-management-process/>

-   Wickham, H., Çetinkaya-Rundel, M., & Grolemund, G. (2023a). Data
    tidying. In *R for Data Science* (2nd ed.).
    <https://r4ds.hadley.nz/data-tidy>

#### Assignment 5:

-   Deposit code from Data Tidying in R live-coding sessions (due Oct.
    3)  

## Week 6 (Oct. 8 & 10)

#### Topics:

-   Documentation & reproducibility workshop

-   Data Acquisition in R (import, webscraping)

#### Reading / Talk:

-   Guest lecture by John Aspler on Persistent Identifiers: Tuesday Oct. 8, from 6-7 PM in Avard Dixon 118

#### Assignment 6:

-   Deposit code from Data Acquisition in R (due Oct. 10)

## Week 7 (Oct. 22 & 24)

#### Topics:

-   Ungrading meetings will be held in regular class time

#### Reading / Talk:

-   Open Access Week guest lecture by Vincent Larivière on Open Science
    (outside of class time, to be announced)
-   Fortin, É. (2023). A glimpse into the fascinating world of file
    formats and metadata. In K. Thompson, E. Hill, E.
    Carlisle-Johnston, D. Dennie, & É. Fortin (Eds.), *Research Data
    Management in the Canadian Context: A Guide for Practitioners and
    Learners* (English). Western University, Western Libraries.
    <https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/canadardm/chapter/insights-into-the-fascinating-world-of-file-formats-and-metadata/>

## Week 8 (Oct. 29 & Oct. 31)

#### Topics:

-   CEWIL Project: Introduction to metadata & XML

-   CEWIL Project: AI and text as data

## Week 9 (Nov. 5 & Nov. 7)

#### Topics:

-   CEWIL: AI and text as data continued

-   CEWIL: Webscraping in R

#### Reading:

-   Wickham, H., Çetinkaya-Rundel, M., & Grolemund, G. (2023c). Web
    scraping. In *R for Data Science* (2nd ed.).
    <https://r4ds.hadley.nz/webscraping>

#### Assignment 7:

-   Metadata files (due Nov. 7)

## Week 10 (Nov. 12 & 14)

Reading Week - no class

## Week 11 (Nov. 19 & Nov. 21)

#### Topics:

-   CEWIL project wrap-up

-   Research Data Management: Part 2

#### Assignment 8:

-   Working with AI and R Reflection (due Nov. 22)

## Week 12 (Nov. 26 & 28)

-   Ungrading Meetings

# Course Policies

## Grading

Grades are extrinsic (external) motivators and often do not measure
student learning over time. Ungrading is a way to shift the focus away
from marks and towards increasing skills and understanding throughout
the term. I have designed this course with the flexibility for you to
continue learning and improving your work based on my feedback. This
feedback will the take the form of suggestions, questions, and resources
to guide your revision. This fits particularly well with the theme of
version control and documentation that runs through this course.

You will be asked to submit your code after participatory live coding in
the classroom. Once we have talked about documenting code and you have
developed more familiarity with R, you will have a chance to revise this
work.

You will be building a portfolio of your work in GitHub. We will meet
one-on-one partway through the term to talk about your learning goals
and progress in the class. I will provide questions to help you with
self-evaluation. We will work together to decide on a mid-term grade
based on your first draft work and a final grade based on your revised
work.

## Due dates

Due dates are included in the syllabus so that we can plan our work. You
do not need to tell me if your work will be late. However, any work
submitted later than 5 days after the due date will not be assessed in
time for you to receive feedback and continue to develop your work. It
is difficult to meet the course learning objectives if you habitually
submit work late.

## Recordings

This class will be held in person. However, if you are feeling unwell,
please stay home. Lectures will be recorded for accessibility and made
available through
[Teams](https://teams.microsoft.com/l/channel/19%3AI7TKF3BPoR70ajZFC7ebuO_hIpi9Op1kn0nUEXZhdVA1%40thread.tacv2/General?groupId=be497ae2-363d-4abf-9cc4-c1290d0fd2a9&tenantId=).

## Artificial Intelligence

In the 2024 Fall term, we will be using ChatGPT Team as part of a
Work-Integrated Learning project. We will be using ChatGPT Team to work
with text as structured data in weeks 8 and 9. The cost of this tool is
covered by a CEWIL grant.

## Names and pronouns

Elizabeth Stregger uses they and she pronouns. You can address me as
Elizabeth (preferred) or Mx. Stregger. If you let me know what pronouns
you use, I will strive to use them. I am also committed to pronouncing
your name properly. I might not get it right on the first try or all the
time. Please feel confident to correct me and I will work to improve.

# Important Mount Allison policies and resources:

Please contact me if you have questions about [Mount Allison’s Academic
Regulations](https://mta.ca/academic_calendar/24-25/_10.html) in the
context of this course, including Academic Calendar Section [10.6
Academic
Integrity](https://mta.ca/academic_calendar/24-25/_10.html#_10.6).

Students with permanent or temporary disabilities or medical conditions
may be eligible for accommodation through the [Meighen
Centre.](www.mta.ca/accesibility)

Mount Allison University’s [Wellness Centre](www.mta.ca/wellness) offers
free, confidential services to students. Services include mental health
support and primary healthcare. Several external resources are also
advertised through the Wellness Centre, many of which are free or
eligible for insurance coverage.

Commit message:

details for Data Acquisition in R, change Assignment 6 date, recording link

data_3101_syllabus.md, after:

---
editor_options: 
  markdown: 
    wrap: 72
---

# Data 3101 Syllabus

Elizabeth_Stregger 2024-08-16

# Data Acquisition and Organization (Fall 2024)

## Contact information:

Elizabeth Stregger\
Email: [estregger\@mta.ca](mailto:estregger@mta.ca){.email}\
Office: Library M13\
Office hours / help: by appointment\
Request an appointment:
[https://outlook.office365.com/owa/calendar/LibraryAppointments\@mta.ca/bookings/s/Lm8pmHeFAkCS_M_0xKAYEQ2](https://outlook.office365.com/owa/calendar/LibraryAppointments@mta.ca/bookings/s/Lm8pmHeFAkCS_M_0xKAYEQ2){.uri}

TA: Sabrina Sandy

## Course description:

This course will build on MATH 1311 to cover high throughput acquisition
and management of data. The course will use diverse data types and
formats to illustrate conceptual challenges across disciplines.
Technical aspects will include evolving approaches to script-based web
scraping, file formats and conversions, data mergers and tidying,
metadata organization and capture. In parallel, the course will cover
theoretical and ethical aspects of data curation and access policies,
development of best practices for research data management and case
studies in secure management of sensitive or private data.

## Key resources (Open Access):

Bryan, J. (n.d.) Happy Git and GitHub for the useR.
<https://happygitwithr.com/index.html>
<https://rfortherestofus.com/2021/02/how-to-use-git-github-with-r/>

Thompson, E. by K., Hill, E., Carlisle-Johnston, E., Dennie, D., &
Fortin, É. (2023). *Research Data Management in the Canadian Context*.
Western University, Western Libraries.
<https://doi.org/10.5206/ZRUV7849>

Wickham, H., Çetinkaya-Rundel, M., & Grolemund, G. (2023). R for data
science: Import, tidy, transform, visualize, and model data (2nd
edition). O’Reilly Media, Inc. <https://r4ds.hadley.nz/>

## Learning objectives

At the end of the course, students are expected to be able to:

-   Demonstrate in depth understanding of the principles, motivations
    and goals for reproducible, ethical, and open data

-   Use Git for communication and reproducible version control

-   Import and tidy diverse data sources across platforms

-   Explore data to identify potential research questions or problems in
    the dataset\

-   Identify best practices for research data management, including data
    organization, storage, security, sharing, and ethical re-use

-   Demonstrate what they have learned about data acquisition, data
    organization, and data tools through self-reflection

# Course schedule (subject to change)

## Week 1 (Sep. 3 & 5)

#### Topics:

-   Course Introduction

-   Install-a-thon: R & Git Repository setup

#### Reading:

Bryan, J. (2018). Excuse Me, Do You Have a Moment to Talk About Version
Control? *The American Statistician*, *72*(1), 20–27.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/00031305.2017.1399928>

## Week 2 (Sep. 10 & 12)

#### Topics:

-   Introduction to R & RStudio

-   Research Data Management Overview

#### **Readings:**

Thompson, K. (2023). The Basics: An Introduction to Research Data
Management. In K. Thompson, E. Hill, E. Carlisle-Johnston, D. Dennie, &
É. Fortin (Eds.), *Research Data Management in the Canadian Context: A
Guide for Practitioners and Learners* (English). Western University,
Western Libraries. <https://doi.org/10.5206/OWNV1575>

Wickham, H., Çetinkaya-Rundel, M., & Grolemund, G. (2023). Workflow:
Basics. In *R for Data Science* (2nd ed.).
<https://r4ds.hadley.nz/workflow-basics>

#### **Assignment 1:**

-   First push to GitHub (due Sep. 12)

## Week 3 (Sep. 17 & 19)

#### Topics:

-   Data Transformation with DPLYR Part 1

-   Data problems: Retraction Watch

#### Reading:

-   Wickham, H., Çetinkaya-Rundel, M., & Grolemund, G. (2023). Data
    transformation. In *R for Data Science* (2nd ed.).
    <https://r4ds.hadley.nz/data-transform>

#### Assignment 2:

-   Deposit code from DPLYR live-coding (due Sep. 19)

## Week 4 (Sep. 24 & 26)

#### Topics:

-   Data Transformation with DPLYR Part 2

-   Code Style

-   GitHub & R Follow-up

#### Readings:

-   Wickham, H., Çetinkaya-Rundel, M., & Grolemund, G. (2023c).
    Workflow: Code style. In *R for Data Science* (2nd ed.).
    <https://r4ds.hadley.nz/workflow-style>

-   Wickham, H., Çetinkaya-Rundel, M., & Grolemund, G. (2023). Joins. In
    *R for Data Science* (2nd ed.). <https://r4ds.hadley.nz/joins>

#### Assignment 3:

-   Retraction Watch assignment (due Sep. 26)

#### Assignment 4:

-   Update code from DPLYR live-coding, using styler (due Sep. 26)

## Week 5 (Oct. 1 & 3)

#### Topics:

-   Data Tidying in R Part 1

-   Data Tidying in R Part 2

#### Readings:

-   Constanzo, L. (2023). Data cleaning during the research data
    management process. In K. Thompson, E. Hill, E.
    Carlisle-Johnston, D. Dennie, & É. Fortin (Eds.), *Research Data
    Management in the Canadian Context: A Guide for Practitioners and
    Learners* (English). Western University, Western Libraries.
    <https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/canadardm/chapter/data-cleaning-during-the-research-data-management-process/>

-   Wickham, H., Çetinkaya-Rundel, M., & Grolemund, G. (2023a). Data
    tidying. In *R for Data Science* (2nd ed.).
    <https://r4ds.hadley.nz/data-tidy>

#### Assignment 5:

-   Deposit code from Data Tidying in R live-coding sessions (due Oct.
    3)  

## Week 6 (Oct. 8 & 10)

#### Topics:

-   Documentation & reproducibility workshop

-   Data Acquisition in R (import, webscraping)

#### Reading / Talk:

-   Guest lecture by John Aspler on Persistent Identifiers: Tuesday Oct.
    8, from 6-7 PM in Avard Dixon 118

    [Recording](https://mountallison-my.sharepoint.com/:v:/g/personal/sgeier_mta_ca/ESsKDXlD5BBAp9sa5qtOtpwBnwefo_eJUEiakDGGe7C7Xw?e=rf4sNe&nav=eyJyZWZlcnJhbEluZm8iOnsicmVmZXJyYWxBcHAiOiJTdHJlYW1XZWJBcHAiLCJyZWZlcnJhbFZpZXciOiJTaGFyZURpYWxvZy1MaW5rIiwicmVmZXJyYWxBcHBQbGF0Zm9ybSI6IldlYiIsInJlZmVycmFsTW9kZSI6InZpZXcifX0%3D)

#### ~~Assignment 6:~~

-   ~~Deposit code from Data Acquisition in R (due Oct. 10)~~

## October 15 & 17

#### Topics:

-   Data Acquisition in R (import, webscraping, databases)

#### Assignment 6:

-   Deposit code from Data Acquisition in R (due Oct. 17)

## Week 7 (Oct. 22 & 24)

#### Topics:

-   Ungrading meetings will be held in regular class time

#### Reading / Talk:

-   Open Access Week guest lecture by Vincent Larivière on Open Science
    (outside of class time, to be announced)
-   Fortin, É. (2023). A glimpse into the fascinating world of file
    formats and metadata. In K. Thompson, E. Hill, E.
    Carlisle-Johnston, D. Dennie, & É. Fortin (Eds.), *Research Data
    Management in the Canadian Context: A Guide for Practitioners and
    Learners* (English). Western University, Western Libraries.
    <https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/canadardm/chapter/insights-into-the-fascinating-world-of-file-formats-and-metadata/>

## Week 8 (Oct. 29 & Oct. 31)

#### Topics:

-   CEWIL Project: Introduction to metadata & XML

-   CEWIL Project: AI and text as data

## Week 9 (Nov. 5 & Nov. 7)

#### Topics:

-   CEWIL: AI and text as data continued

-   CEWIL: Webscraping in R

#### Reading:

-   Wickham, H., Çetinkaya-Rundel, M., & Grolemund, G. (2023c). Web
    scraping. In *R for Data Science* (2nd ed.).
    <https://r4ds.hadley.nz/webscraping>

#### Assignment 7:

-   Metadata files (due Nov. 7)

## Week 10 (Nov. 12 & 14)

Reading Week - no class

## Week 11 (Nov. 19 & Nov. 21)

#### Topics:

-   CEWIL project wrap-up

-   Research Data Management: Part 2

#### Assignment 8:

-   Working with AI and R Reflection (due Nov. 22)

## Week 12 (Nov. 26 & 28)

-   Ungrading Meetings

# Course Policies

## Grading

Grades are extrinsic (external) motivators and often do not measure
student learning over time. Ungrading is a way to shift the focus away
from marks and towards increasing skills and understanding throughout
the term. I have designed this course with the flexibility for you to
continue learning and improving your work based on my feedback. This
feedback will the take the form of suggestions, questions, and resources
to guide your revision. This fits particularly well with the theme of
version control and documentation that runs through this course.

You will be asked to submit your code after participatory live coding in
the classroom. Once we have talked about documenting code and you have
developed more familiarity with R, you will have a chance to revise this
work.

You will be building a portfolio of your work in GitHub. We will meet
one-on-one partway through the term to talk about your learning goals
and progress in the class. I will provide questions to help you with
self-evaluation. We will work together to decide on a mid-term grade
based on your first draft work and a final grade based on your revised
work.

## Due dates

Due dates are included in the syllabus so that we can plan our work. You
do not need to tell me if your work will be late. However, any work
submitted later than 5 days after the due date will not be assessed in
time for you to receive feedback and continue to develop your work. It
is difficult to meet the course learning objectives if you habitually
submit work late.

## Recordings

This class will be held in person. However, if you are feeling unwell,
please stay home. Lectures will be recorded for accessibility and made
available through
[Teams](https://teams.microsoft.com/l/channel/19%3AI7TKF3BPoR70ajZFC7ebuO_hIpi9Op1kn0nUEXZhdVA1%40thread.tacv2/General?groupId=be497ae2-363d-4abf-9cc4-c1290d0fd2a9&tenantId=).

## Artificial Intelligence

In the 2024 Fall term, we will be using ChatGPT Team as part of a
Work-Integrated Learning project. We will be using ChatGPT Team to work
with text as structured data in weeks 8 and 9. The cost of this tool is
covered by a CEWIL grant.

## Names and pronouns

Elizabeth Stregger uses they and she pronouns. You can address me as
Elizabeth (preferred) or Mx. Stregger. If you let me know what pronouns
you use, I will strive to use them. I am also committed to pronouncing
your name properly. I might not get it right on the first try or all the
time. Please feel confident to correct me and I will work to improve.

# Important Mount Allison policies and resources:

Please contact me if you have questions about [Mount Allison’s Academic
Regulations](https://mta.ca/academic_calendar/24-25/_10.html) in the
context of this course, including Academic Calendar Section [10.6
Academic
Integrity](https://mta.ca/academic_calendar/24-25/_10.html#_10.6).

Students with permanent or temporary disabilities or medical conditions
may be eligible for accommodation through the [Meighen
Centre.](www.mta.ca/accesibility)

Mount Allison University’s [Wellness Centre](www.mta.ca/wellness) offers
free, confidential services to students. Services include mental health
support and primary healthcare. Several external resources are also
advertised through the Wellness Centre, many of which are free or
eligible for insurance coverage.
