lectures/DATA_3101_introduction.md, before:

DATA 3101: Data Acquisition and Organization
================
Elizabeth Stregger
2024-09-06

## Learning objectives

At the end of the course, students are expected to be able to:

- Demonstrate in depth understanding of the principles, motivations and
  goals for reproducible, ethical, and open data

- Use Git for communication and reproducible version control

- Import and tidy diverse data sources across platforms

- Explore data to identify potential research questions or problems in
  the dataset

- Identify best practices for research data management, including data
  organization, storage, security, sharing, and ethical re-use

- Demonstrate what they have learned about data acquisition, data
  organization, and data tools through self-reflection

## Research Data

<figure>
<img src="../images/research_process_condon_2022.jpg"
alt="(Condon et al., 2022)" />
<figcaption aria-hidden="true">(Condon et al., 2022)</figcaption>
</figure>

## Data Science

<figure>
<img src="../images/data_science_schematic_wickham.png"
alt="(Wickham et al., 2023)" />
<figcaption aria-hidden="true">(Wickham et al., 2023)</figcaption>
</figure>

We’ll be focusing on importing, tidying, and transforming data in this
class. Consider taking DATA 3001 (Data Visualization and Communication)
with Dr. Riley to complete the process.

## Tools: Git & RStudio

- One of the themes throughout this course is the importance of
  reproducibility and open data
- RStudio: import, tidy, analyze, and communicate data using a
  reproducible workflow
- RStudio can be linked with Git for version control
- Many of the good practices in research data management can be
  demonstrated using these tools (importance of file naming, file
  structures, documentation, version control)

## Practice and Learning

- Approximately half of our class time will be participatory live coding
  and problem solving.

<figure>
<img src="../images/skill_acquisition_carpentries.png"
alt="Carpentries, 2024" />
<figcaption aria-hidden="true">Carpentries, 2024</figcaption>
</figure>

## CEWIL Project

- CEWIL = Co-operative Education and Work-Integrated Learning
- We will be working on a data project to support Open Access
  publications
- We will acquire the data through webscraping and transform it to meet
  the requirements of the Open Journal Systems’ import plugin
- We will use both R and Artificial Intelligence text analysis
  approaches
- You will have access to ChatGPT Team (data analysis, file uploads, web
  browsing) supported through the CEWIL grant
- You will receive a stipend

## Ungrading

- My focus is on learning and interaction
- Submit - get feedback - improve & resubmit
- Tracking engagement, contributions, and progress
- Self-evaluation

Q: Have you had any experiences with ungrading?

## To Do List

- Now: fill out the student information survey in Moodle
- Read the syllabus
- Reading: Bryan, J. (2018). Excuse Me, Do You Have a Moment to Talk
  About Version Control? *The American Statistician*, *72*(1), 20–27.
  <https://doi.org/10.1080/00031305.2017.1399928>
- Pro tip: if you’re reading articles off campus, check out the [MTA
  Libraries Off-Campus
  Bookmarklet](https://libraryguides.mta.ca/research_help/research_tips/how_do_i)
  to get access to electronic resources.

## References

Condon, P., Bresnahan, M., & Opuda, E. (2022, January 1). Visual
Representation of the Research Process, a Lifecycle Model.
<https://scholars.unh.edu/faculty_pubs/1454>

The Carpentries. (2024). Building skill with practice. The Carpentries
Instructor Training.
<https://carpentries.github.io/instructor-training/02-practice-learning.html>

Wickham, H., Çetinkaya-Rundel, M., & Grolemund, G. (2023). Introduction.
In R for Data Science (2nd ed.). <https://r4ds.hadley.nz/intro>

Commit message:

Add create GitHub account to lecture 1

lectures/DATA_3101_introduction.md, after:

DATA 3101: Data Acquisition and Organization
================
Elizabeth Stregger
2024-09-06

## Learning objectives

At the end of the course, students are expected to be able to:

- Demonstrate in depth understanding of the principles, motivations and
  goals for reproducible, ethical, and open data

- Use Git for communication and reproducible version control

- Import and tidy diverse data sources across platforms

- Explore data to identify potential research questions or problems in
  the dataset

- Identify best practices for research data management, including data
  organization, storage, security, sharing, and ethical re-use

- Demonstrate what they have learned about data acquisition, data
  organization, and data tools through self-reflection

## Research Data

<figure>
<img src="../images/research_process_condon_2022.jpg"
alt="(Condon et al., 2022)" />
<figcaption aria-hidden="true">(Condon et al., 2022)</figcaption>
</figure>

## Data Science

<figure>
<img src="../images/data_science_schematic_wickham.png"
alt="(Wickham et al., 2023)" />
<figcaption aria-hidden="true">(Wickham et al., 2023)</figcaption>
</figure>

We’ll be focusing on importing, tidying, and transforming data in this
class. Consider taking DATA 3001 (Data Visualization and Communication)
with Dr. Riley to complete the process.

## Tools: Git & RStudio

- One of the themes throughout this course is the importance of
  reproducibility and open data
- RStudio: import, tidy, analyze, and communicate data using a
  reproducible workflow
- RStudio can be linked with Git for version control
- Many of the good practices in research data management can be
  demonstrated using these tools (importance of file naming, file
  structures, documentation, version control)

## Practice and Learning

- Approximately half of our class time will be participatory live coding
  and problem solving.

<figure>
<img src="../images/skill_acquisition_carpentries.png"
alt="Carpentries, 2024" />
<figcaption aria-hidden="true">Carpentries, 2024</figcaption>
</figure>

## CEWIL Project

- CEWIL = Co-operative Education and Work-Integrated Learning
- We will be working on a data project to support Open Access
  publications
- We will acquire the data through webscraping and transform it to meet
  the requirements of the Open Journal Systems’ import plugin
- We will use both R and Artificial Intelligence text analysis
  approaches
- You will have access to ChatGPT Team (data analysis, file uploads, web
  browsing) supported through the CEWIL grant
- You will receive a stipend

## Ungrading

- My focus is on learning and interaction
- Submit - get feedback - improve & resubmit
- Tracking engagement, contributions, and progress
- Self-evaluation

Q: Have you had any experiences with ungrading?

## To Do List - In Class

1.  Register a GitHub account

A few username tips: - Include part of your name - this makes it easier
for people to know who you are and trust you! - Don’t highlight your
current university or employer (for me, this would have led to problems:
estregger-mcmaster, estregger-umanitoba, estregger-rrc, estregger-usask,
estregger-uwo, estregger-mta ??? UGH) - Use all lowercase letters

2.  Complete the Student Information Survey in Moodle

I will need your GitHub username to set up your private repository for
the class. Information about your major, coding background, and learning
goals will help me choose examples.

## To Do List - This Week

- Read the syllabus
- Reading: Bryan, J. (2018). Excuse Me, Do You Have a Moment to Talk
  About Version Control? *The American Statistician*, *72*(1), 20–27.
  <https://doi.org/10.1080/00031305.2017.1399928>

Pro tip: if you’re reading articles off campus, check out the [MTA
Libraries Off-Campus
Bookmarklet](https://libraryguides.mta.ca/research_help/research_tips/how_do_i)
to get access to electronic resources.

## References

Condon, P., Bresnahan, M., & Opuda, E. (2022, January 1). Visual
Representation of the Research Process, a Lifecycle Model.
<https://scholars.unh.edu/faculty_pubs/1454>

The Carpentries. (2024). Building skill with practice. The Carpentries
Instructor Training.
<https://carpentries.github.io/instructor-training/02-practice-learning.html>

Wickham, H., Çetinkaya-Rundel, M., & Grolemund, G. (2023). Introduction.
In R for Data Science (2nd ed.). <https://r4ds.hadley.nz/intro>
